# PCD8544 Library

This library is for monochrome graphical LCD based on the Philips PCD8544
controller
([datasheet](https://github.com/carlosefr/pcd8544/blob/docs/docs/pcd8544.pdf?raw=true))
or compatibles. These displays quite cheap and are commonly found on older monochrome mobile
phones, such as the [Nokia 3310](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_3310) or
[5110](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokia_5110).

This is a modified version of the
[PCD8544 library](https://github.com/carlosefr/pcd8544) written by
[Carlos Rodrigues](https://github.com/carlosefr). It is ported from C++ to C
syntax and is meant to be used with the sduino environment for the STM8.

This library is meant to have a minimal memory footprint. If you need
graphics and other features and can spare the resources, check out the
[library](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-PCD8544-Nokia-5110-LCD-library)
from Adafruit (no sduino/STM8 port yet, though).


## API


Thanks to some [c preprocessor macro magic](macro.html) the API syntax is
very similar to the original C++ syntax. Apart from the usual name mangeling
for polymorph functions replacing the dots in the method names for
underscores and a small modification of the initializer code should be
enough. See below for an example.

The instantiation "method" can be called only one time per sketch as this
library is a singleton library. It is not possible to use more than one
instance per sketch.


Arduino syntax				|sduino syntax
------------------------------		|---------------------
`PCD8544 lcd`				|no default pin mapping supported
`PCD8544 lcd(sclk,sdin,dc,reset,sce)`	|`PCD8544 (lcd,sclk,sdin,dc,reset,sce)`
`lcd.begin()`				|`lcd_begin()`
`lcd.begin(width,height)`		|`lcd_begin_wh(width,height)`
`lcd.begin(width,height,chiptype)`	|`lcd_begin_full(width,height,chiptype)`
`lcd.stop()`				|`lcd_stop()`
`lcd.clear()`				|`lcd_clear()`
`lcd.clearLine()`			|`lcd_clearLine()`
`lcd.setPower(flag)`			|`lcd_setPower(flag)`
`lcd.display()`				|`lcd_display()`
`lcd.noDisplay()`			|`lcd_noDisplay()`
`lcd.setInverse(flag)`			|`lcd_setInverse(flag)`
`lcd.setContrast(level)`		|`lcd_setContrast(level)`
`lcd.home()`				|`lcd_home()`
`lcd.setCursor(col,line)`		|`lcd_setCursor(col,line)`
`result = lcd.write(value)`		|`result = lcd_write(value)`
`lcd.createChar(chr,glyph[])`		|`lcd_createChar(chr,glyph)`
`lcd.drawBitmap(data[],columns,lines)`	|`lcd_drawBitmap(data[],columns,lines)`
`lcd.drawColumn(lines, value)`		|`lcd.drawColumn(lines, value)`

The default resolution of 84x48 fits the commons Nokia 5110 display.


## Example

```c
#include <PCD8544.h>

PCD8544(lcd, PC5, PC6, PC4, PC7, PD1); // sclk,sdin,dc,reset,sce

int counter = 0;

void setup() {
  lcd_begin();	// default resolution is 84x48
}


void loop() {
  // Write some text on the first line...
  lcd_setCursor(0, 0);
  lcd_print_s("Hello, World!");

  // Write the counter on the second line...
  lcd_setCursor(0, 1);
  lcd_print_u(counter);

  delay(200);
  counter++;
}
```




## Hardware connections

To use this library, you must first connect your LCD to the proper pins on
the STM8 board. This library uses bitbanging for the SPI data transfer, so
you are not bound to the SPI pins for SCLK and MOSI.

For a Nokia 5510 display connected to a STM8S103 breakout board, the
connections look like this:

Display Pin	| STM8S breakout board
----------------|------------
Pin 1 (VCC)	| +3.3V (marked by a square around the pin on the silkscreen)
Pin 2 (GND)	| Ground
Pin 3 (SCE)	| STM8S103 pin PD1 (sduino digital pin 10)
Pin 4 (RST)	| STM8S103 pin PC7 (sduino digital pin 9)
Pin 5 (D/C)	| STM8S103 pin PC4 (sduino digital pin 6)
Pin 6 (MOSI)	| STM8S103 pin PC6 (sduino digital pin 8)
Pin 7 (SCLK)	| STM8S103 pin PC5 (sduino digital pin 7)
Pin 8 (LED)	| 82 Ohm resistor to 3.3V or 330 Ohm to 5V

Since the STM8S works on 3.3V you can connect the data lines directly to
port lines. If you are using this display with a 5V CPU (like on most
Arduino boards), you have to add extra components to connect it to the
digital pins of the Arduino (not necessary if you are using a 3.3V
variant of the Arduino, such as Sparkfun's Arduino Pro).

The background LEDs need only 2.8V/6mA. If you connect them to a port pin,
prefer a HS (High sink) pin (see CPU datasheet, all pins except the
oscillator and the I2C pin PA1/PA2 and PB4/PB5). PWM pins are the best
choice.

when soldering the pin connectors, keep in mind that the upside of the
display is the thicker part of the metal frame.


For a Nokia 3310 display the connections would be the following:

Display Pin       | Arduino Pin
------------------|------------
Pin 1             | +3.3V Pin
Pin 2 (SCLK)      | PC5, digital Pin 7
Pin 3 (SDIN/MOSI) | PC6, digital Pin 8
Pin 4 (D/C)       | PC4, digital Pin 6
Pin 5 (SCE)       | PD1, digital Pin 10
Pin 6             | Ground Pin
Pin 7             | 10uF capacitor to Ground Pin
Pin 8 (RST)       | PC7, digital Pin 9

For this display model, "Pin 1" is the leftmost pin when facing the back of
the display with the connector on top.


## Custom Symbols

The library allows the use of custom bitmap symbols (5x8), defined by an
array of five bytes. Checkout the examples in the library folder for usage
of this function.

To make it easy to create custom symbols, there's a
graphical glyph editor [available online](http://carlosefr.github.io/pcd8544/).


[Back to the main page](../index.html)
